Health MEC, Dr Phophi Ramathuba, has expressed her concern over the latest Covid-19 figures for Limpopo Province. In a press release on 7 January, the department’s spokesperson Neil Shikwambana said that the province has recorded 1 575 positive cases in 24 hours (as on 7 January), which is the highest ever figure to be recorded in a reporting cycle in the province since the first case of Covid-19. Capricorn District still bears the highest figure in the province, with 623 new cases recorded and Polokwane Municipality remains on high alert. Vhembe District has also seen a sharp increase, with 408 new cases being reported. In Vhembe the Thulamela Municipality is the focus point with 623 active cases. In the Mopani District 253 new cases were reported. The Greater Tzaneen municipality remains on high alert in this district. Although the Waterberg District took the lead in the province at one point, their numbers are no longer increasing at an alarming rate. The district has recorded 189 new cases. This is also the case with Sekhukhune District, where only 98 new cases were recorded. However, the department will be watching the two districts closely, being mining hubs, and as the mines will be resuming with activities. Shikwambana said that the increase in numbers are quite concerning, considering that during the beginning of December the province only recorded around 20 cases per 24 hour counting cycle. According to the MEC, these escalating figures paint a worrying picture of community members not following Covid-19 safety protocols during the recent festive season. “We are now paying the price for social gatherings, Christmas parties and luncheons, and weddings and birthday parties which we have seen during the month of December. We advised that any kind of gathering during the festivities was a bad idea, also considering that we had people from other provinces who came home to attend those gatherings,” Ramathuba said. As figures are rising exponentially, the MEC wishes to once again make a clarion call to community members to act more responsibly during this difficult period. “As the virus attacks indiscriminately during this second wave, we need to see real behaviour change from our people in order to make a real difference,” she said. The focus is now also on the availability of hospital beds. “Though we are seeing huge numbers of people coming to our hospitals due to Covid-19, our hospitals still have enough beds for patients who need admission due to the virus,” Ramathuba concluded.