The Limpopo community was left devastated on Monday with the sad news of the death of well-known and much-loved Louis Trichardt business couple, Anthony Scott (68) and his wife Norma (65). The couple died in a head-on collision on Monday morning, 25 January. The accident occurred around 08:40 on the Groblersdal/Middelburg road. Accompanying them were two of their employees, Pheneul Dongola and Desmond Ndibuho Likavha. Their vehicle collided with an oncoming vehicle. Anthony and Norma died on impact, as well as three of the four occupants of the oncoming vehicle.  Dongola and Likavha survived the accident, as well as the driver of the other vehicle. At the time of our going to press, Dongola and Likavha were still recovering in hospital, as well as the driver of the other vehicle. “My brothers Benjie, Ian and I are devastated. Life without Anthony and Norma is unconceivable. Better parents no child could ever ask for. They were our best friends, mentors, role models and inspiration,” said son Patrick. Many will remember Ant [as he was known by many] and Norma as the owners of Ant Scott Plumbing/Manasi Civils/Sons of Africa. “We’ve run the family business as a team and stuck together, no matter what. We strive to follow in their footsteps,” said Patrick. Anthony and Norma celebrated 41 years of marriage in November 2020. They met during the Bush War in Rhodesia when Ant was seconded to National Parks and was called out to investigate a poaching incident on Benjie Cawood’s citrus farm in Beit Bridge. “There he met one of the beautiful daughters … ‘and the rest is history’ as they say”. “They were married in Rhodesia during the war and eventually moved to Louis Trichardt, where they started a small construction company, building houses and doing domestic plumbing. They slowly but surely built the businesses into what they are today,” said Patrick Anthony was a successful entrepreneur, engineer and plumber by trade, an avid pilot, cyclist, rally driver, athlete, naturalist, and role model, as well as a humorous, giving, loving father, friend, and husband. Norma was capable of anything – nothing scared her! “…gardening, farming, construction, hunting, fishing, bee-keeping, sewing, homemaking, catering, flower arranging and, above all, the most loving mother. She was also one of the few women who spoke Tshivenda fluently. She was very respected in the Venda community,” said Patrick. “As a couple they were inseparable - they complimented each other in business; their contribution to the community was notable; their home was open to all and their love was unconditional – they will be sorely missed but never forgotten,” said Patrick. A private memorial service will be held for the couple for immediate family and close friends because of the Covid-19 restrictions. The service will be streamed live, but at the time of our going to press, the link to the service was not yet available. 